---
layout: post
title:  "Will Non-US Subsidiary Payments Become Subject to Subpart F Tax in 2014?"
date:   2014-10-07 18:00:00
categories: international tax
---

Given the current state of the international tax rules, one could reasonably believe that US-based multi-national enterprises ("MNEs") avoid paying US taxes on just about any
transaction short of paying actual dividends to US shareholders from repatriated foreign earnings. For example, most US-based MNEs can move foreign assets between their 
non-US subsidiaries ("CFCs," short for controlled foreign corporations) without triggering US tax, notwithstanding the complicated "subpart F" rules that target passive 
income of these CFC entities. In general, the subpart F rules tax dividends received by CFCs as passive-type income. However, many CFCs avoid tax on such foreign asset 
transfers by using a special provision under the tax code that exempts dividends and other passive-type payments made by related CFCs -- Section 954(c)(6).  

Congress enacted Section 954(c)(6) in 2006, largely to address the perception that US-based MNEs--subject to US tax on worldwide income--were at a competitive disadvantage 
relative to their non-US counterparts based in jurisdictions that impose tax only on home-country earnings. Congress originally enacted Section 954(c)(6) with a 3-year life, 
but has repeatedly extended the exemption for 1- and 2-year intervals through 2013 as part of the now-regular "tax extenders" bill that many taxpayers have come to rely 
upon. It is far from clear whether Congress will again extend Section 954(c)(6) to include 2014 and future years, making it difficult for growing MNEs to structure their 
international operations in a tax-efficient manner. Indeed, the American Institute of CPAs (AICPA) recently authored a [letter to Congress][Letter link] describing the 
deleterious effect that this uncertainty is having on US businesses.  

So, what can businesses do today if expanding into international markets? One option may be to rely on the check-the-box rules to amalgamate non-US operations into 
one taxable entity for US federal income tax purposes, thereby allowing the MNE to ignore intercomany payments for tax purposes. However, there are some restrictions to this 
approach, which is not available for certain types of non-US entities classifed as "per se corporations" under IRS regulations. Additionally, any non-US entity that "checks 
the box" must have its financial activities and operations reported to the US tax authorities as part of its parent's return. MNEs considering changes to their international 
structure should seek competent tax counsel in light of the changing rules and uncertainty of existing law.

CIRCULAR 230 DISCLAIMER: To ensure compliance with requirements imposed by the IRS, please be informed that any tax advice contained herein was not intended or written to be 
used, and cannot be used, for the purposes of (i) avoiding any tax-related penalties under federal, state or local tax law or (ii) promoting, marketing, or recommending to 
another party any transaction or matter addressed herein.

[Letter link]: http://www.aicpa.org/press/pressreleases/2014/pages/aicpa-urges-immediate-congressional-action-on-tax-extenders.aspx